written/how-i-work.md, before:

# How I work

In my career, I've seen a pattern of people of providing documents describing
their work ethic. It is meant to provide a quick read of "these are the reason I
do these things". There are variations that also include "How to work with me."

As an exercise, I wanted to build my own document. It will be changing document.

- Introduction: Provide a brief overview of your professional background,
  skills, and experience.
  - Software engineer for 15+ years.
  - Have built things for startups and large enterprise clients. Including
    single user software and millions of users per day.
  - A generalist that believes in the right tool for the job.

- Work ethic: Discuss your approach to work, such as your values, beliefs, and
  principles.
  - Want to build maintainable software, through simple concepts and approaches.
  - Prefer sharks over dinosaurs, sharks are still around, dinosaurs are
    extinct.
    [Source](https://www.simplethread.com/20-things-ive-learned-in-my-20-years-as-a-software-engineer/)

- Communication style: Explain how you prefer to communicate with coworkers,
  clients, and supervisors.
  - Direct Communication >> Process >> Tools

  Being able to approach anyone within your team (or organization) is always
  going to have the greatest impact. This is how you build relationships.

  When repetitive communication occurs, process can be implemented to
  streamline. It helps define what the expectation is of the communication --
  decision making, status updates, prioritization, etc.

  Tools help facilitate and complement a process that has been standardized. If
  you cannot do your process without your tool, it is not filling the need
  properly.
  - When being remote, one-on-one's hands ogg keyboard. Let's talk to each
    other, not get distracted by slack.

- Time management: Outline your methods for prioritizing tasks, staying
  organized, and meeting deadlines.
  - Availability and accessibility. If I am not in a position to give someone 10
    minutes then things like _Direct Communication_ can never occur. I will work
    to reorganize my schedule to fit time. People over meetings.
  - Prioritization is more important than deadline. When setting a deadline, we
    are setting a goal, it translates to "everything needs to be done." Having
    the ability to prioritize gives the flexibility for delivery before a
    deadline.

- Problem-solving: Discuss your process for identifying, analyzing, and
  resolving issues.
  - Before we can solve a problem, we need to be able to define a problem. Too
    often engineers have a solution, but cannot define the problem.

- Collaboration: Describe your approach to working with others, including your
  strengths and any challenges you have faced in the past.
  - Prefer one-on-one over throwing over the wall. This doesn't not mean just
    engineer to engineer. Different disciplines can approach each other to
    collaborate. I've worked with product managers and designers in live
    collaboration

- Feedback:
  - constructive and actionable
- Life balance:
  - set boundaries
- Conflict Resolution:
  - positive and respectful

Commit message:

add more about how I work

written/how-i-work.md, after:

# How I work

In my career, I've seen a pattern of people of providing documents describing
their work ethic. It is meant to provide a quick read of "these are the reason I
do these things". There are variations that also include "How to work with me."

As an exercise, I wanted to build my own document. It will be changing document.

- Introduction: Provide a brief overview of your professional background,
  skills, and experience.
  - Software engineer for 15+ years.
  - Have built things for startups and large enterprise clients. Including
    single user software and millions of users per day.
  - A generalist that believes in the right tool for the job.

- Work ethic: Discuss your approach to work, such as your values, beliefs, and
  principles.
  - Want to build maintainable software, through simple concepts and approaches.
  - Prefer sharks over dinosaurs, sharks are still around, dinosaurs are
    extinct.
    [Source](https://www.simplethread.com/20-things-ive-learned-in-my-20-years-as-a-software-engineer/)

- Communication style: Explain how you prefer to communicate with coworkers,
  clients, and supervisors.
  - Direct Communication >> Process >> Tools

  Being able to approach anyone within your team (or organization) is always
  going to have the greatest impact. This is how you build relationships.

  When repetitive communication occurs, process can be implemented to
  streamline. It helps define what the expectation is of the communication --
  decision making, status updates, prioritization, etc.

  Tools help facilitate and complement a process that has been standardized. If
  you cannot do your process without your tool, it is not filling the need
  properly.
  - When being remote, one-on-one's hands ogg keyboard. Let's talk to each
    other, not get distracted by slack.

- Time management: Outline your methods for prioritizing tasks, staying
  organized, and meeting deadlines.
  - Availability and accessibility. If I am not in a position to give someone 10
    minutes then things like _Direct Communication_ can never occur. I will work
    to reorganize my schedule to fit time. People over meetings.
  - Prioritization is more important than deadline. When setting a deadline, we
    are setting a goal, it translates to "everything needs to be done." Having
    the ability to prioritize gives the flexibility for delivery before a
    deadline.

- Problem-solving: Discuss your process for identifying, analyzing, and
  resolving issues.
  - Before we can solve a problem, we need to be able to define a problem. Too
    often engineers have a solution, but cannot define the problem.

- Collaboration: Describe your approach to working with others, including your
  strengths and any challenges you have faced in the past.
  - Prefer one-on-one over throwing over the wall. This doesn't not mean just
    engineer to engineer. Different disciplines can approach each other to
    collaborate. I've worked with product managers and designers in live
    collaboration

- Feedback: Discuss how to receive and give feedback in the workplace.
  - When providing feedback, I appreciate an approach communicating the intended
    goal and offering actionable suggestions. If you find it challenging to
    approach me directly, please feel free to share your feedback with my
    manager

- Life balance: Introduce the boundaries to ensure work is a means to live.
  - There will be no work-related applications on my smartphone.
  - My work hours will be defined so that I am accessible for communication.
- Conflict Resolution:
  - positive and respectful
