written/index.md, before:

# Welcome

## About

Hi :wave:! I'm JT.

I'm a friend, programmer, mentor, and over-lander. I've been an
[ultra runner](https://ultrasignup.com/m_results_participant.aspx?fname=Jt&lname=Archie)
:running:, [salsa dancer](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gT1qaj2PMrw) :dancer:,
and [beer reviewer](https://www.youtube.com/yetanotherbeershow) :beer:.

As a programmer, I've learned to tinker, reverse engineer, team building, and
product design. I want to capture what I've learned, so it can be shared.

## Blog

Sometimes I write things. These are the latest posts from blog.

<!-- deno-fmt-ignore-start -->

{{range $doc := iterDocs "posts/" 3}}
- [{{$doc.Title}}]({{$doc.SlugPath}}) on {{$doc.Basename}}
{{end}}

<!-- deno-fmt-ignore-end -->

Read the [all the entries](/posts).

## Work

I love working with people to build better teams and products. The next goal is
to have a bespoke software shop.

Learn about [How I Work](/how-i-work.html)

## Projects

- [followthesnow.today](https://followthesnow.today) list all the ski resorts in
  the United States with their expected snowfall. As a Colorado resident, I
  wanted a quick way to review where I should go skiing for the day/week.
- [`some-router`](https://github.com/jtarchie/some-router) is built to handle
  javascript routing based on a path for applications. It is agnostic to
  framework and runtime to be used in the frontend or backend. It was developed
  trying to find a [Sinatra](http://sinatrarb.com/)-like router for a Cloudflare
  Worker application.

### Contact

I always appreciate face-to-face speaking, but video chat is a comfortable
compromise. If you're interested in working with me, let's
[email](mailto:hello2023@jtarchie.com) or
[talk](https://calendly.com/jtarchie/15min). We can discuss everything from a
full-time job, consulting, or just catch up.

If you ask for support from work under a previous employer, an invoice of
$250USD per hour, billed to the hour above, will be required.

### Resume

My resume is provided in different formats.

[HTML](resume/index.html) / [PDF](resume/resume.pdf)

Commit message:

add reference to hack snacks

written/index.md, after:

# Welcome

## About

Hi :wave:! I'm JT.

I'm a friend, programmer, mentor, and over-lander. I've been an
[ultra runner](https://ultrasignup.com/m_results_participant.aspx?fname=Jt&lname=Archie)
:running:, [salsa dancer](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gT1qaj2PMrw) :dancer:,
and [beer reviewer](https://www.youtube.com/yetanotherbeershow) :beer:.

As a programmer, I've learned to tinker, reverse engineer, team building, and
product design. I want to capture what I've learned, so it can be shared.

## Blog

Sometimes I write things. These are the latest posts from blog.

<!-- deno-fmt-ignore-start -->

{{range $doc := iterDocs "posts/" 3}}
- [{{$doc.Title}}]({{$doc.SlugPath}}) on {{$doc.Basename}}
{{end}}

<!-- deno-fmt-ignore-end -->

Read the [all the entries](/posts).

## Work

I love working with people to build better teams and products. The next goal is
to have a bespoke software shop.

Learn about [How I Work](/how-i-work.html)

## Projects

- [followthesnow.today](https://followthesnow.today) list all the ski resorts in
  the United States with their expected snowfall. As a Colorado resident, I
  wanted a quick way to review where I should go skiing for the day/week.
- [`some-router`](https://github.com/jtarchie/some-router) is built to handle
  javascript routing based on a path for applications. It is agnostic to
  framework and runtime to be used in the frontend or backend. It was developed
  trying to find a [Sinatra](http://sinatrarb.com/)-like router for a Cloudflare
  Worker application.
- [Hack Snacks](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCitQxsD8AAj9jyj1qACJyKw) is an
  experiment in making short form content for Youtube. It consist of tips and
  tricks for programming languages and frameworks.

### Contact

I always appreciate face-to-face speaking, but video chat is a comfortable
compromise. If you're interested in working with me, let's
[email](mailto:hello2023@jtarchie.com) or
[talk](https://calendly.com/jtarchie/15min). We can discuss everything from a
full-time job, consulting, or just catch up.

If you ask for support from work under a previous employer, an invoice of
$250USD per hour, billed to the hour above, will be required.

### Resume

My resume is provided in different formats.

[HTML](resume/index.html) / [PDF](resume/resume.pdf)
