# Debugging and Resolving Issues with Go and the `sqlite3` Library

I recently embarked on a journey to incorporate geographical data into a Golang
program. This was an exciting exploration, as most solutions require PostgreSQL
and PostGIS. However, for the project I'm working on, having a whole database
would add an extra step in the deployment process. I decided that the
application I'm building should either be a static website or have a self-hosted
option for searching for geographical information.

Let's start by defining the data schema. I have a bunch of latitude and
longitude coordinates, along with a title for each location. For example, store
location 45 with a phone number (123) 555-1234. The objective is to build a
store locator so that when you visit this company's website, you can input your
location, say, Denver, Colorado, and find the closest stores. This is a standard
feature on many company websites with physical locations.

During my investigation, I discovered that the SQLite database has an extension
called Spatialite, which can perform many tasks that the PostGIS extension can
do. If you're unfamiliar with SQLite, it differs from a standard database in
that it doesn't rely on a client-server protocol but works with a local file.
Since this data won't change frequently, this is a suitable solution. However, I
encountered some technical challenges when trying to use the extension.

In Go, the most popular library for SQLite is
[go-sqlite3](https://github.com/mattn/go-sqlite3). It requires CGO, which may
deter some programmers, but I didn't have a hard requirement for or against CGO
– I just needed to build a working feature.

The library allows extensions to be loaded at runtime. These extensions are
named after their compiled dynamic library. For the latest version of
Spatialite, the code looks like this:

```go
sql.Register("sqlite_with_spacialite", &sqlite.SQLiteDriver{
	Extensions: []string{
		"mod_spatialite",
	},
})
```

This is then used with Golang's `database/sql` library with the custom driver
name.

```go
db, err := sql.Open("sqlite_with_spacialite", "locations.sqlite")
if err != nil {
	return nil, fmt.Errorf("could not open database file: %w", err)
}
```

This is a simple setup. However, I ran into issues because of being on a Mac
with Apple Silicon. This is where this blog post transitions into debugging
mode.

I installed SQLite and Spatialite using [brew](https://brew.sh/).

```bash
brew install sqlite3 libspatialite spatialite-tools
```

So, let's dive in and explore how I successfully debugged and resolved the
problem with the help of Google, GitHub Issues, and a bit of persistence!

When I ran the code, it would not execute due to an error related to the dynamic
module compiled for Spatialite.

```
dlopen(mod_spatialite.dylib, 0x000A): tried: 'mod_spatialite.dylib' (no such file), '/System/Volumes/Preboot/Cryptexes/OSmod_spatialite.dylib' (no such file), '/usr/lib/mod_spatialite.dylib' (no such file, not in dyld cache), 'mod_spatialite.dylib' (no such file), '/usr/local/lib/mod_spatialite.dylib'
```

This error message indicates that the dynamic module could not be found in a
lookup path. I had to spend some time researching:

- Where is the `mod_spatialite.dylib` located?
- How to tell CGO where to look up that file.

On Apple Silicon, `brew` changed the location of the installation directory to
`/opt/homebrew` (see this
[issue](https://github.com/Homebrew/brew/issues/14810)). I found it at
`/opt/homebrew/lib/mod_spatialite.dylib`.

With CGO, there are options to change the lookup path for libraries via
`ldflags`. The [docs](https://pkg.go.dev/cmd/link) state that you can use `-r`
to set the dynamic linker search path.

```bash
$ go run --ldflags=-r=/opt/homebrew/lib main.go
fatal error: unexpected signal during runtime execution
[signal SIGSEGV: segmentation violation code=0x2 addr=0xc00000000 pc=0x1028cc274]
```

This led to a runtime panic.

This means that the code compiled without a runtime error, but the panic caused
memory access issues. It took time to pinpoint the problem. I had some leads,
but I needed more concrete. I searched through any GitHub issue that mentioned
Go, SQLite, and SIGSEGV. This
[issue](https://github.com/canonical/dqlite/issues/179) said a specific build
tag that could be used to compile the local install SQLite –
`--tags libsqlite3`.

```bash
$ go run --ldflags=-r=/opt/homebrew/lib --tags libsqlite3 main.go
../../go/pkg/mod/github.com/mattn/go-sqlite3@v1.14.16/sqlite3_load_extension.go:25:8: could not determine kind of name for C.sqlite3_enable_load_extension
../../go/pkg/mod/github.com/mattn/go-sqlite3@v1.14.16/sqlite3_load_extension.go:78:8: could not determine kind of name for C.sqlite3_load_extension
```

The compilation is now failing, with no more runtime errors.

My Google search skills suggested that this error has to do with the compilation
of the C code. The recommendations were to remove a newline before an `import`
call. In Go, when importing C headers, the Go parser requires `import "C"` to be
immediately after them.

I didn't have any `import "C"` in my codebase. After inspecting the file
`sqlite3_load_extension.go`, I didn't see the problem mentioned. This required
some further searching.

More Googling led me to this
[comment](https://github.com/mattn/go-sqlite3/issues/839#issuecomment-674074775),
which indicated that I needed to point to the `sqlite` headers. This required
setting `CGO_CFLAGS`. I had to find where the headers were for the `sqlite`
installation I had.

```bash
`$ find /opt/homebrew | grep sqlite | grep '\.h$'
/opt/homebrew/Cellar/libspatialite/5.0.1_2/include/spatialite/sqlite.h
/opt/homebrew/Cellar/sqlite/3.41.2/include/sqlite3.h
/opt/homebrew/Cellar/sqlite/3.41.2/include/sqlite3ext.h
```

It looks like they're located in `/opt/homebrew/Cellar/sqlite/3.41.2`, which
corresponds to the version that was installed.

```bash
$ CGO_CFLAGS="-I/opt/homebrew/Cellar/sqlite/3.41.2/include" \
  go run \
    --ldflags=-r=/opt/homebrew/lib \
    --tags libsqlite3 \
    main.go
/opt/homebrew/Cellar/go/1.20.2/libexec/pkg/tool/darwin_arm64/link: running clang failed: exit status 1
ld: warning: directory not found for option '-L/usr/local/opt/sqlite/lib'
Undefined symbols for architecture arm64:
  "_sqlite3_enable_load_extension", referenced from:
      __cgo_621878b5dd3b_Cfunc_sqlite3_enable_load_extension in 000007.o
     (maybe you meant: __cgo_621878b5dd3b_Cfunc_sqlite3_enable_load_extension)
  "_sqlite3_load_extension", referenced from:
      __cgo_621878b5dd3b_Cfunc_sqlite3_load_extension in 000007.o
     (maybe you meant: __cgo_621878b5dd3b_Cfunc_sqlite3_load_extension)
ld: symbol(s) not found for architecture arm64
clang: error: linker command failed with exit code 1 (use -v to see invocation)
```

Another compilation error. This time, however, it provided a clue to the issue.

The linker is searching for the SQLite dynamic library in the incorrect
location. I needed to find where `sqlite` had been compiled within
`/opt/homebrew` as a dynamic library.

```bash
$ find /opt/homebrew | grep sqlite | grep dylib
/opt/homebrew/Cellar/sqlite/3.41.2/lib/libsqlite3.0.dylib
/opt/homebrew/Cellar/sqlite/3.41.2/lib/libsqlite3.dylib
```

To set the location of the dynamic library, you can use `CGO_LDFLAGS`.

```bash
CGO_CFLAGS="-I/opt/homebrew/Cellar/sqlite/3.41.2/include" \
CGO_LDFLAGS="-L/opt/homebrew/Cellar/sqlite/3.41.2/lib" \
  go run \
    --ldflags=-r=/opt/homebrew/lib \
    --tags libsqlite3 \
    main.go
# command-line-arguments
ld: warning: directory not found for option '-L/usr/local/opt/sqlite/lib'
INFO program started
```

It's working! There's still a warning message, but I'm not overly concerned.
Warnings can be treated as recommendations.

I've set up everything above in environment variables within a `.envrc` file.
This allows me to avoid polluting the commands and not have to remember them.

```bash
export GOFLAGS="--tags=libsqlite3 --ldflags=-r=/opt/homebrew/lib"
export CGO_LDFLAGS="-L/opt/homebrew/Cellar/sqlite/3.41.2/lib"
export CGO_CFLAGS="-I/opt/homebrew/Cellar/sqlite/3.41.2/include"
```

This solution works, but there needs to be an issue with it. If brew upgrades
sqlite, I'll need to update the directories. This can be fixed with some
directory lookups within the .envrc script, but at this point, I'm done
investigating this.

By leveraging Google and GitHub Issues, I could identify the root cause of the
problem, explore various solutions, and ultimately find the one that worked for
my situation. As developers, we often encounter challenges that require us to
dig deep and think critically. I hope this post has shown you the value of
perseverance and resourcefulness when tackling such issues. Happy coding!
