# Taking Time Off Between Jobs

<article>
 A follow up was written <a href="2023-10-14.html">Transitioning Back into the Labor Force</a>
</article>

Amid our fast-paced lives, taking time off between jobs might seem daunting. But
as I reflect on my journey, I want to share the profound impact these pauses
have had on my life and why you might consider embracing them, too.

Years ago, my father jokingly suggested I write about how to take time off
between jobs. Today, as I see friends and co-workers navigating career
transitions, I realize the importance of discussing this topic. It's a path I've
walked out of sheer burnout and necessity.

My first experience with taking time off was after a grueling stint at a
startup. I clocked in over 80 hours weekly, often sleeping in the office to meet
deadlines. The stress was palpable. Despite the potential skepticism of former
colleagues, I felt like I was always the first one in and the last one out. One
day, I decided I couldn't continue. I left, and the following week, I was
bedridden, my body finally succumbing to the exhaustion.

This period of rest wasn't just about physical recovery. It was a time of
introspection. I had to relearn how to relax to understand that not every day
needed a milestone. This realization was transformative. I began to explore,
interviewing for various roles and eventually landing a job at Pivotal Labs in
San Francisco. With its myriad tech opportunities, this city was a playground
for personal and professional growth.

Years later, I found myself in New York City after another job transition. With
the lessons from my previous break, I explored the city with vigor, visiting
coffee shops, exploring boroughs, and even traveling to Berlin. The freedom to
interview for jobs without the constraints of a 9-5 was liberating.

However, life is unpredictable. After a short stint at another company, I faced
layoffs. By 2023, I decided to take another break. This time, the world was
different. The pandemic has reshaped our lives, our relationships, and our
values. This break allowed me to reconnect with family, help friends, and, most
importantly, reflect on my journey.

Now, as I interview for new roles, I do so with clarity about what I want and
where I want to be. The opportunity to take time off is about more than
relaxation. It's about growth. It's about living life beyond the confines of a
9-5 routine. The pandemic has shown us that flexibility is possible, and we
should seize it.

So, what's my advice to you? Live. Relax. Learn. Explore. Whether picking up a
new hobby or simply taking a moment to breathe, remember that this time off is
_your_ time. The wording misrepresents itself. It's not about being idle; it's
about growth, reflection, and understanding oneself better.

Remember that there's more to life in a world where our jobs often define us.
Don't be your harshest critic. Embrace the pauses, for they might lead you to
the most fulfilling chapters of your life.
