# Exploring Goja: A Golang JavaScript Runtime

This post explores [Goja](https://github.com/dop251/goja), a JavaScript runtime
library in the Golang ecosystem. Goja stands out as a powerful tool for
embedding JavaScript within Go applications, offering unique advantages when
manipulating data and exposing an SDK that doesn't require a `go build` step.

## Background: The Need for Goja

In my project, I encountered challenges when querying and manipulating large
datasets. Initially, everything was written in Go, which was efficient but
became cumbersome, especially when dealing with complex JSON responses. While
Go's minimalistic approach is generally advantageous, the verbosity required for
specific tasks slowed me down.

Using an embedded scripting language could simplify the process, leading me to
explore various options. Lua was my first choice because of its reputation for
being lightweight and embeddable. Still, I quickly found that the available Go
libraries for Lua needed to be more mature than I needed them to be.

I then investigated other popular scripting languages in the Go ecosystem. I
considered options like [Expr](https://github.com/expr-lang/expr/),
[V8](https://github.com/tommie/v8go), and
[Starlark](https://github.com/google/starlark-go), but eventually, Goja emerged
as the most promising candidate.

Here is the
[GitHub repository](https://github.com/jtarchie/benchmark-tests/blob/22789057b4fcf95443ea8cb61f261dea31935cda/eval_benchmark_test.go),
where I conducted some benchmarks on these libraries, testing their performance
and ease of integration with Go.

## Why Goja?

Goja won me over because of its seamless integration with Go structs. When you
assign a Go struct to a value in the JavaScript runtime, Goja automatically
infers the fields and methods, making them accessible in JavaScript without
requiring a separate bridge layer. It leverages Go's reflection capabilities to
invoke getters and setters on these fields, offering a robust and transparent
interaction between Go and JavaScript.

Let's dive into some examples to see Goja in action. These examples highlight
features I've found useful, but desired to have more examples in the
documentation with.

## Assigning and Returning Values

To start, let’s take a simple example where we pass an array of integers from Go
to the JavaScript runtime and filter out the even values.

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"

	"github.com/dop251/goja"
)

func main() {
	vm := goja.New()

	// Passing an array of integers from 1 to 100
	values := []int{}
	for i := 1; i <= 100; i++ {
		values = append(values, i)
	}

	// Define the JavaScript code to filter even values
	script := `
		values.filter((x) => {
			return x % 2 === 0;
		})
  `

	// Set the array in the JavaScript runtime
	vm.Set("values", values)

	// Run the script
	result, err := vm.RunString(script)
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}

	// Convert the result back to a Go slice of empty interfaces
	filteredValues := result.Export().([]interface{})

	fmt.Println(filteredValues)
	// Outputs: [2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 100]

	first := filteredValues[0].(int64)
	fmt.Println(first)
}
```

In this example, you can see that iterating through an array in Goja doesn’t
require explicit type annotations. Goja is able to infer the type of the array
based on its content, thanks to Go’s reflection mechanism. When filtering the
values and returning the result, Goja converts the result back to an array of
empty interfaces (`[]interface{}`). This is because Goja needs to handle
JavaScript’s dynamic typing within Go’s static type system.

If you need to work with the resulting values in Go, you’ll have to perform type
assertions to extract the integers. Internally, Goja represents all integers as
`int64`.

## Structs and Method Calls

Next, let’s explore how Goja handles Go structs, particularly focusing on
methods and exported fields.

```go
package main

import (
    "fmt"
    "github.com/dop251/goja"
)

type Person struct {
    Name string
    age  int
}

// Method to get the age (unexported)
func (p *Person) GetAge() int {
    return p.age
}

func main() {
    vm := goja.New()

    // Create a new Person instance
    person := &Person{
        Name: "John Doe",
        age:  30,
    }

    // Set the Person struct in the JavaScript runtime
    vm.Set("person", person)

    // JavaScript code to access the struct's fields and methods
    script := `
        const name = person.Name;    // Access exported field
        const age = person.GetAge(); // Access unexported field via getter
        name + " is " + age + " years old.";
    `

    result, err := vm.RunString(script)
    if err != nil {
        panic(err)
    }

    fmt.Println(result.String()) // Outputs: John Doe is 30 years old.
}
```

In this example, I’ve defined a `Person` struct with an exported `Name` field
and an unexported `age` field. The `GetName` method is exported. When accessing
these fields and methods from JavaScript, Goja adheres to the naming conventions
on the struct. The method `GetAge` is accessed as `GetName`.

There is a pattern for making the Javascript naming convention of camel case
translate to Golang naming convention via
[`FieldNameMapper`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/dop251/goja#FieldNameMapper).
This allows for the Go method `GetAge` to be called as `getAge` in the
javascript invocation.

## Exception Handling

When an exception occurs in JavaScript, Goja uses standard Go error handling to
manage it. Let's explore an example of a runtime exception—division by zero.

```go
package main

import (
	"errors"
	"fmt"

	"github.com/dop251/goja"
)

// JavaScript code that triggers a division by zero error
const script = `
	// Using BigInt notation in JavaScript
	const a = 1n / 0n;
`

func main() {
	vm := goja.New()

	// Execute the JavaScript code
	_, err := vm.RunString(script)

	// Handle any errors that occur
	var exception *goja.Exception
	if errors.As(err, &exception) {
		fmt.Printf("JavaScript error: %s\n", exception.Error())
		// Output: JavaScript error: RangeError: Division by zero at <eval>:1:1(3)
	} else if err != nil {
		// Handle other types of errors (if any)
		fmt.Printf("Error: %s\n", err.Error())
	}
}
```

The error value returned is of type `*goja.Exception`, which provides
information about the JavaScript exception that was raised and where it failed.
While I haven't found a strong need to inspect these errors beyond logging them
to services like New Relic or DataDog, Goja does offer the tools to do so if
necessary.

Additionally, Goja can raise other types of exceptions, such as
`*goja.StackOverflowError`, `*goja.InterruptedError`, and
`*goja.CompilerSyntaxError`, which correspond to specific issues related to the
interpreter. These exceptions can be useful to handle and report, especially
when dealing with clients that execute JavaScript code.

## Conclusion

Once I figured out these patterns for Goja, I was able to create a sandbox
runtime for my Go program. My users and I can execute a script without having to
compile a Go program, and we have a fast feedback loop. This was the outcome I
always wanted.
