# Ensure JIT execution of `luajit`

I've always been impressed with the [LuaJIT](http://luajit.org/) runtime.
Mike Pall has been praised (and rightfully so) for years for creating it.
It is the fastest runtime for a dynamic language. 

I've taken an interest in experimenting with it.

It has the ability to optimize dynamic code to efficient assembly instructions.

For example, calculating the sum of 1 to 100.

```lua
local sum = 0
for i = 1, 100 do
	sum = sum + i
end
```

It will generate assembly that is efficient.
We can get a print out of the assembly using `luajit -jdump`.
This outputs a lot, but our interest lies in the `LOOP` scope.

```assembly
->LOOP:
xorps xmm6, xmm6
cvtsi2sd xmm6, ebp
addsd xmm7, xmm6           # sum = sum + i
add ebp, +0x01             # i = i + 1
cmp ebp, +0x64             # if i <= 100
jle ->LOOP                 #   goto LOOP
jmp ->EXIT
```

The numbers assigned to `sum` and `i` are used as typed information.
These types don't change during the execution of the script.
This allows the JIT to make efficient assembly instructions.

LuaJIT (like Lua) assumes all numbers are floating point, though.
The instruction `cvtsi2sd` converts integers to floating point.
Though this may be fast, it is an extraneous instruction.

I wanted to see if LuaJIT could just do integer specific instructions.
This could probably done if we could provide hints to the JIT.
Lua doesn't have a static type system, though.

```lua
local ffi = require("ffi")
ffi.cdef [[
    typedef struct { int v; } int_t;
]]

local int = ffi.metatype("int_t", {})
local sum = int(0)
for i = 1, 100 do
	sum.v = sum.v + i
end
```

```assembly
->LOOP:
add ebp, ebx        # sum = sum + i
mov [rax+0x10], ebp # not sure what this is for
add ebx, +0x01      # i = i + 1
cmp ebx, +0x64      # if i <= 100
jle ->LOOP          #   goto LOOP
jmp ->EXIT
```

We have some extraneous instructions, which don't seem to be helpful here.
Can we get this loop to be tighter.

With type information from `ffi` struct forces the instruction integer addition (`add`).
The example above is simple and raw, but shows how easy it was to add types.
LuaJIT has ways of [abstracting the struct field](http://luajit.org/ext_ffi_tutorial.html#metatype), so the implementation does bleed through.

Using the metamethods, we can have the struct use the `+` operator.

```lua
local ffi = require("ffi")
ffi.cdef [[
    typedef struct { int v; } int_t;
]]

local int
int = ffi.metatype("int_t", {
	__add = function(a, b) return int(a.v + b) end
})
local sum = int(0)
for i = 1, 100 do
	sum = sum + i
end
```

```assembly
->LOOP:
add ebp, ebx    # sum = sum + i
add ebx, +0x01  # i = i + 1
cmp ebx, +0x64  # if i <= 100
jle ->LOOP      #   goto LOOP
jmp ->EXIT
```

Here we've managed to take standard lua code and using he `ffi` functionality optimize it.
The JIT is using the type information for more optimized assembly.

The loop cannot get any tighter, unless we remove the loop entirely.
I have not been able to get LuaJIT to perform this optimization.