# Tech debt is team debt

Working on a product team always has two primary goals. Figuring out what you
are building and when you can deliver those features. Optimally, the team keeps
up the velocity of delivery indefinitely.

As an engineer, you're delivering, yet something irks you. Features start to
become harder to bear. There's a refactoring you've been neglecting. Then it
occurs, you cannot keep delivering as you once were.

You've reached the imaginary line of technical debt.

Often we'll look for a scapegoat.

- A former engineer that used to be on the team.
- Too much work and not enough time because leaders have a deadline
- And, the one, I dread hearing the most, "The product manager won't let me."

I assure you, it is your fault. A product manager has never looked over your
shoulder or pull request and said, "You can not do tech debt, now."

Technical debt is the symptom of a team not able to prioritize. Your team needs
to have space for prioritizing its needs. Some things are necessary to complete,
but others are not. The key is to focus on the essential things, the
necessities.

A product manager will say, "Let's deliver features. How do we get there?" How
engineering achieves this is up to them. The product manager is on your team to
achieve the same goals. Please include them in your mindset and process. Don't
demonize somebody for any failure of the group. Work with them to improve and
resolve it.

Tech debt is an unapproachable and undefinable thing. We've accepted that we
won't ever have a finished product! We'll iterate over it through continuous
product delivery. Tech debt still exists as this bucket of "it'll never be
finished, so save it for _later_". We need to refrain from it. Remove the
negative connotation.

We need to be better gardeners with code being the garden. If we prune, replant,
etc., the garden will grow into something lovely. There is no such thing as a
hack-day for a gardener because it would be inefficient for the long-term
curation of the garden.

Maintaining code is a consistent process. Doing it as part of the development
process means you are always thinking about it.

This will remove your team's debt.
