Working on a product team always has two primary goals. Figuring out what you
are building and when can you deliver those features. Optimally, the team keeps
up the velocity of delivery indefinitely.

As an engineer, as you've been delivering, something irks you. Features start to
become harder to deliver. There’s a refactoring you’ve been neglecting. Then it
occurs, you cannot keep delivering as you once were.

You’ve reached the imaginary line of technical debt.

Often we’ll look for a scapegoat.

- A former engineer that used to be on the team.
- Too much work and not enough time because leaders have a deadline
- The one I dread hearing the most is, "The product manager won’t let me."

I assure you, it is your fault. A product manager has never looked over your
shoulder or pull request and said, "You can not do tech debt, now."

Technical debt is the symptom of a team that not able to prioritize. Your team
needs to have space for prioritizing its needs. Some things are necessary to
complete, but others are not. The key is to focus on the important things, the
necessities. Knowing that everything is polished helps, but never actually
finishing the work is detrimental to a team's ability to deliver.

A product manager will always say, "Let's delivery features. How do we get
there?" How engineering achieves this is up to them. Don't add the additional
and unrealistic expectations. The product manager is on your team, trying to
achieve the same goals. Include them in your mindset and process. Don't demonize
somebody for any failing of the team. Work with them to improve and resolve it.

Tech debt is an unapproachable thing. With product delivery, we've accepted that
we won’t ever have a finished product, but will iterate over it. Tech debt still
is this bucket of "it’ll never be finished, so save it for _later_". We need to
refrain from this phrase to not have the negative connotation it has.

We need to be better gardeners — code is the garden. If we prune, replant, etc.
the garden will grow into something nice. It has to be done while gardening,
though. Not at one big "you’ll have a hack day for tech debt" kind of way.

When you become a gardener, the practice of maintaining code because a
consistent process. Doing it as part of the development process means you are
always thinking about it.
