# Testing Thoughts

When it comes to testing, the simplest explanation I have for tests is:

> Users use our code through the web, console, and other user interfaces. Tests
> are another interface just for the developers.

Tests provide the developers confidence that things are working the way they
should.

## What does it mean to be red then green?

I always remember "red, green, then refactor" when I write a test.

1. Red

   An assertion (in the test) was made on the code's behavior. It is failing on
   an assertion test.
2. Green

   Write the code to make that tests pass. Now you have something in a working
   state. Commit it!
3. Refactor

   Now that you know things are in a working and deliverable state, can you
   refactor your code?

Do you need to do this each time? No.

It helps me narrow down the scope of a test and have a criteria for when I am
_done_ with it.

## Is your test testing just your test or your code?

Imagine this a situation while programming.

There is a test, some code was written, and everything is green. Someone comes
back, edits some code, all the tests are still green.

This is great! Tests should have to change with a different implementation of
code, just as long as the assertions of the behavior is the same.

When you comment out your code, your test should fail. Yet it is still passing.
Why is that?

Sometimes our tests are just testing our tests, not our code. Ee might be
testing a mock implementation of something.

Tests should fail when I comment out the code I believe to be testings. It may
not be the tests I wrote, but something should break, so we know something
changed.

## How do you start writing tests?

When writing tests, I like to think of the happy path first, "If everything was
working perfectly, what would I expect to happen?" Allowing you to write tests
free from the distractions of errors and side effects. It can help with test
setup the behavior you want the tests.

The next step is a sad path -- errors, side effects, and other paths. For
example, "If we cannot connect to the API, what should we do?" It helps test the
_branching_ (conditions) of your code.

Thinking about your tests in discrete chunks will help produce understandable
tests. Tests are another means to document your code, similar to commenting.
