# Park Ranger notes

I have been investigating a career change, considering various aspects such as
financial implications, time commitments, path to retirement, and my interests
in different areas. During the past few months, I took time off from my current
career to explore various opportunities. I applied to numerous breweries and
distilleries and volunteered for trail maintenance in Jefferson County, outside
Denver, Colorado. I conversed with people from tech and non-tech backgrounds to
understand different career options. My top three choices are becoming a park
ranger, starting my own distillery, and becoming a tech mentor hourly.

The idea of becoming a park ranger has piqued my interest. However, information
on this career path is scattered due to the various government agencies and
types of parks involved. There are county, state, and federal park ranger
positions, each with different responsibilities and environments. The role of a
park ranger is more diverse and non-traditional than commonly perceived. My
experience in trail maintenance as a volunteer has been immensely satisfying,
with physical labor, such as moving rocks and planting plants, providing a sense
of accomplishment and immediate impact on the environment and people's
experience in the park.

Becoming a park ranger is more complex than jumping into the role; it typically
requires working up from an entry-level position. I have listened to a podcast
by two former park rangers who emphasized the importance of starting from the
bottom and working one's way up. Opportunities for park ranger positions are not
consistently advertised, and searching for openings is challenging. To increase
my chances, I plan to build relationships with current state and federal park
rangers, learn about their experiences, and arrange a ride-along to get a
firsthand understanding of the job.

During a conversation with a recently appointed park ranger, I gained valuable
insights into the law enforcement aspect of their job. The ranger mentioned that
their training primarily focused on customer service-related tasks. However,
they were surprised to discover that a significant part of their duties involved
law enforcement. They described how they often patrol the park on bicycles,
ensuring visitors adhere to park rules, such as no starting fires where
prohibited, no alcohol consumption in restricted areas, and promoting courteous
behavior among visitors. While the ranger found the law enforcement
responsibilities manageable, they expressed mixed feelings about the possibility
of ever having to use firearms. However, they acknowledged that different levels
of law enforcement within the ranger community offer various ways to de-escalate
situations. The ranger's firsthand account shed light on the diverse roles and
responsibilities of park rangers beyond the common perception of simply being in
natural environments.

While it may take time and effort to become a park ranger, having a degree in
park management, forestry management, or a relevant field expedites the process.
Additionally, degrees in biology can be advantageous, as park rangers sometimes
need expertise in identifying plant species. I have encountered professionals
with biology backgrounds working on trail maintenance, demonstrating their
valuable knowledge and skills.
